# Problem

You are climbing a stair case. It takes n steps to reach to the top.

Each time you can either climb 1 or 2 steps. In how many distinct ways can you climb to the top?

Note: Given n will be a positive integer.

# Solution

## Idea

1. **Brute Force**

Systematically enumerating all possible candidates for the solution and checking whether each candidate satisfies the problem's statement.

`climbStairs(i,n)=(i+1,n)+climbStairs(i+2,n)` where i is the current step and n is the destination step.

This algorithm works but exceeds the time limit in leetcode with python3.

Time complexity: `O(2^N)`, size (breadth) of recursion tree will be 2^N. Time complexity of a recursion function would be the number of calls (that is, breadth of the recursion tree).

Space complexity: `O(N)`, depth of recursion tree will go up to N. [Space complexity of a recursion function](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dxyYP3BSdcQ) would be the number of returns (that is, no bigger than the depth of the recursion tree).

2. **Dynamic Programming**

Simplifying a complicated problem by breaking it down into simpler sub-problems in a recursive manner.

Time complexity: `O(N)` (single loop up to n with the help of array)

Space complexity: `O(N)` (array size of n is used)

3. **Fibonacci Number**

`Fib(n)=Fib(n−1)+Fib(n−2)` where `Fib(1)=1` and `Fib(2)=2`

Time complexity: `O(N)` (Single loop up to n is required to calculate the nth fibonacci number)

Space complexity: `O(1)` (constant space is used for variable `second` and `third`)

4. **Binet's Formula**

[Binet's formula](https://artofproblemsolving.com/wiki/index.php?title=Binet%27s_Formula) is an explicit formula used to find the $n$th term of the Fibonacci sequence.

Time complexity: `O(log(N))` (pow method has time complexity of `O(log(N))`: number of squarings is equal to the number of zeros in binary expansion of pow, and number of multiplications is equal to the number of ones in binary expansion of pow, so overall number of operations is about the number of significant bits of pow, `log2(pow)`)

Space complexity: `O(1)`

## Code

```python
class Solution:
    def climbStairs(self, n):
        """
        :type n: int
        :rtype: int
        """
        # brute force
        def climb(i,n):
            if i == n-2: return 2
            if i == n-1: return 1
            return climb(i+1,n) + climb(i+2,n)
        return climb(0,n)
        
        
        # dynamic programming
        if n == 1: return 1
        dp = [1]*n
        dp[0] = 1
        dp[1] = 2
        for i in range(2,n):
            dp[i] = dp[i-1] + dp[i-2]
        return dp[-1]
        
        
        # fibonacci number
        if n == 1: return 1
        first = 1
        second = 2
        for i in range(2,n):
            third = first + second
            first = second
            second = third
        return second
    
        
        # Binet's formula
        import math
        sqrt5 = math.sqrt(5)
        return int(1/sqrt5*(pow((1+sqrt5)/2, (n+1)) - pow((1-sqrt5)/2, (n+1))))
```













